= GLOSSARY =

----

== CARTOGRAPHY ==
=== Macro-areas ===
* Large sectors consisting of many areas.

=== Areas ===
* Areas within macro-areas.

=== Micro-areas ===
* Small areas within areas.

=== Intersection ===

=== Grid ===

=== Reciprocation ===

=== Consecutive Cover ===

=== Shrouding ===

=== Multi-point Access ===

=== Multi-point Exit ===

=== Unlockable Shortcuts ===

=== Two-sector Alternation Model ===

=== Hub and Spoke Model ===

=== Web Model ===

=== Double Loop Model ===

=== Master/Sector Model ===

=== Environmental Transformation ===

=== Environmental Manipulation ===

=== Environmental Hazards ===

=== One-way Valves ===

=== Inverse Forking ===

----

== COMBAT ==
=== Area of Effect ===
* Damage that is dealt over a wide area of space in an intance, typically a circular area.

=== Cluster Enemies ===
* Enemies that attack in very high numbers that are otherwise typically very weak on their own.

=== Mobs ===
* One or more group(s) of hostile enemies. Typically distinguished as "mobs" in boss/miniboss fights.

=== Minions ===
* One or more group(s) of enemies that fight alongside a distinguishably stronger or primary opponent. Typically used in boss/miniboss fights.

=== Multi-Stage Fight ===

=== Circle-strafing ===
* A gameplay strategy in which the player strafes in a circular motion around a target to gain an advantage.

=== Tracking ===

=== Exposed Weakspot ===
* A weakspot directly or indirectly attached to a body that is more-or-less constantly exposed. (e.g. an enemy's head).

=== Shrouded Weakspot ===
* A weakspot directly or indirectly attached to a body that is only exposed to a certain position relative to the weakspot (e.g. an enemy's backside).

=== Peakaboo Weakspot ===
* A weakspot directly or indirectly attached to a body that fluctuates between being exposed and unexposed. (e.g. an enemy's blinking eye).

=== Dynamic Weakspot ===
* A weakspot directly or indirectly attached to a body that changes its properties (such as location, size, behavior, etc.) in a distinguishable way.

=== Auxiliary Weakspot ===
* A weakspot directly or indirectly attached to a body to act as a secondary, precursive, or supportive role

=== Timed Weakness ===

=== Cat and Mouse ===

=== King Kong ===

=== Mano-E-Mano ===

=== Man VS Machine ===

=== Ring Out ===

=== Tick Damage ===
* Damage that is dealt over a set frequency or "ticks". Typically only small damage dealt per tick.

=== Incapacitation ===
* Describes a mechanic that disables or nullifies a receptor or hazard temporarily or indefinitely without necessarily [[#Termination|killing]] it.

=== Termination ===
* Describes a mechanic that disables or nullifies a receptor or hazard permanently. Usually defined in a context where [[#Incapacitation|incapacitation]] is also an option.

----

== GAMEPLAY ==
=== Audible Hinting ===
* A gameplay situation where the player is hinted information through audible queues.

=== Visual Hinting ===
* A gameplay situation where the player is hinted information through visual queues.

=== Mechanical Hinting ===
* A gameplay situation where the player is hinted information directly associated with gameplay mechanics that can be conveyed either audibly, visually, or by other means. Not to be confused with either [[#Audible Hinting|Audible Hinting]] or [[#Visual Hinting|Visual Hinting]].

=== Expositional Hinting ===
* A gameplay situation where the player is hinted or explicated information by systematic explaination.

=== Solve to Proceed ===
* A gameplay situation where the player is either forced or incentivized to solve a puzzle of some kind to proceed further or achieve an outcome.

=== Activate to Proceed ===
* A gameplay situation where the player is either forced or incentivized to activate something in order to proceed further or achieve an outcome.

=== Search and Activate to Proceed ===
* A gameplay situation where the player is either forced or incentivized to search for whatever needs to be activated in order to proceed further or achieve an outcome.

=== Shoot Targets to Proceed ===
* A gameplay situation where the player is either forced or incentivized to shoot a set number of targets to proceed further or achieve an outcome.

=== Shoot and Climb to Proceed ===
* A gameplay situation where the player is either forced or incentivized shoot one or more targets to then climb something as a result to proceed or achieve an outcome.

=== Yield to Proceed ===
* Yield to proceed is defined as a gameplay situation where the player is either forced or incentivized yield and react properly to something to proceed further or achieve an outcome.

=== Out-of-box Option ===
* Situations where the player is forced, incentivized, or otherwise rewarded for "thinking outside the box"

=== Basic Mechanical Tutorial ===

=== Target Practice ===
* A gameplay situation where the player is forced or incentivized to shoot or attack targets for means of practice. Similar to [[#Taste Testing|taste testing]] but at a more elementary level.

=== Taste Testing ===
* A gameplay situation where either a player is encouraged or forced to test an ability/weapon etc. or challenge an unknown force or puzzle to a limited extent/ability.

=== Teasers ===
Describes certain items, places or more abstract things that are inaccessible, but are made sure the player knows about them, or can know about them. (a.k.a. blue-balling)

=== Fast Travel ===
A mechanic that allows the player to quickly travel to another area/macro-area. Typically this mechanic is unlocked or granted somehow, to contrast between normal travel.

=== Consecutive Action Sequence ===

=== Timed Consecutive Action Sequence ===

=== Ordered Consecutive Action Sequence ===

=== Timed Escape Sequence ===

=== Optional Technique Mastery ===

=== Streamline Ability ===

=== Backtrack Filler ===
* Backtrack filler is defined as

=== Linear Fetch and Escape ===

=== Linear Fetch-and-escape Sequence ===

=== Fetch Quest ===

=== Grand Fetch Quest ===
* Grand fetch quest

=== Powerup Flow ===

=== Non-linear Item Quest ===

=== Multi-purpose Abilities ===

=== Mechanical Realignment ===

=== Environmental Puzzle ===

=== Inventory Puzzle ===
* Describes a puzzle where the player must use something relating to their inventory or an item(s) in their inventory to solve.

=== Mechanical Puzzle ===

=== Sokoban Puzzle ===
* Describes a puzzle where the player must push an object(s) into the correct spot(s). For example, these typically include - but are not limited to - pushing a block to hold a switch. The block could even lose friction when pushing it, requiring the player to find a correct route using stops or pegs.

=== Systematic Gatekeeping ===

=== Extrinsic Gatekeeping ===

=== Intrinsic Gatekeeping ===

=== Opportunity Cost ===

=== Button Masher ===

=== Cloaking ===
* AKA "Visual Filtering" describes things that only appear or "activate" through select "filters" (e.g. X-ray specs unveiling certain items).

=== Deflection ===
* Loosely describes a gameplay scenario where the player bumps around until they find where to go by process of elimination.

=== Mechanical Realignment ===

=== Infinite Loop Exploit ===

=== One-shot ===

=== Curveball ===

=== Road Less Traveled ===

----

== LORE ==
=== Expositional Lore ===
* Lore that is given to the player by means of systematic interpretation or explaination.

----

== PRESENTATION ==
=== Graphical FX ===
(GFX) The kinds of visual effects that grab your attention or provide ambiance, sometimes taking advantage of certain hardware/software traits.

=== Easter Eggs ===
----

== STEALTH ==
=== Hiding Spots ===
* Self explanitory.

=== Blindspots ===
* Ditto.

=== Breadcrumbs ===
* What you leave behind either after performing an action (e.g. cartridge casings), or passively such as walking (e.g. footsteps).

=== Sound Emitters ===
* Bodies that emit sound (e.g. gunshots, noisy floors) - typically in a context where that sound can be detected by other [[#Sound Receptors|sound-sensitive bodies]].

=== Sound Suppressors ===
* Bodies or mechanics that can suppress sounds (e.g. silencers, sound suppressing floors) - typically in a context where that sound can be detected by other [[#Sound Receptors|sound-sensitive bodies]].

=== Visual Receptors ===
* Bodies or mechanics that can perceive strictly/primarily visual information (e.g. video cameras, watchguards).

=== Sound Receptors ===
* Bodies or mechanics that can perceive strictly/primarily audible information (e.g. microphones).

=== Special Receptors ===
* Bodies or mechanics that can perceive strictly/primarily auxiliary information or information alternative to the main two- being audible and visual.

=== Super Receptors ===
* Bodies or mechanics that have a distinguishable ability to perceive several forms of information (e.g. humans, bloodhounds).

=== Dynamic Receptors ===
* Bodies or mechanics that have a distinguishable ability to fluctuate their perceptibility (e.g. sleepy guards).

=== Fuzzy Detection ===
* A mechanic that describes a buffer between being discovered and being hidden.
