== GENERAL/MISC ==
* Guards have invisible vision cones that can detect you when you are on a different level above or below them. When you activate this, it will trigger fuzzy detection.
* Guards include [[glossary#Fuzzy Detection|visual fuzzy detection]] that extends slightly outside their main vision cone. When triggered, they will pathfind through the shortest path to investigate the area you were suspected of being when it triggered. They will then return to their normal post if undisturbed.
* Picking up and dropping incapacitated guards can sometimes drop ammo.
* 3-hit combo no longer has extended hitbox from the first game.
* Pressing the action button while hugging against a low enough surface can enable you to climb on top of the object. Doing the same on a railing enables you to hang and shimmy on it.
* Walking in rain or in puddles followed by walking on a dry surface will result in [[glossary#Breadcrumbs|wet footsteps being left behind]], and guards can notice and follow them.
* Lockers can be opened and used to be hid in, or to hide another incapacitated/dead guard. Locked doors can also be punched/shot down to reveal contents.
* Upon being spotted, the enemy will attempt to radio-in for backup by hiding, or by melee attacking if youre too close. If his queue finishes, the guards will enter 'alert' phase where radar is jammed and guards are aware of your presence. Attack team will be called in as well, and guards will recieve backup if they are killed in this phase, and will previously dead guards will be replaced. Once evaded, the guards will enter 'clearing' mode where guards will clear your area of most hiding spots. Once cleared, the guards will enter 'caution' mode where attack team leaves, and guards are on high alert.
* Attack team guards can have riot shields and shotguns.
* The effects of a tranquilizer round are highly dependent on where on the body it is shot- the head having the fastest effect.
* If a guard is tranquilized next to a nearby guard, that guard will notice and call in for the attack team, triggering 'caution' mode. If an already tranquilized guard is noticed by another guard, that guard will walk over to him and simply wake him up. If a tranquilized guard wakes up on his own, he will simply go back on patrol. If a dead guard is found by another guard, that guard will call in for the attack team as well as a replacement for the dead guard, triggering 'caution' mode.
* Depending on area and lighting, player and enemy models [[glossary#Breadcrumbs|give off shadows]], and can even be seen by enemies.
* [[glossary#Interactable Elements|Interactable elements]] include fire hydrants, steam ducts, light bulbs, wine glasses, electric bells, icecubes, bags of flour, glass panes, pots and pans.
* Playing through "Tanker" on hard locks certain doors to access the ship, forcing the player to go through a different (longer) path to reach the destination. In addition to generally more soldiers in certain areas throughout the game, hard mode can add more mission objectives such as a higher number of bombs to freeze in the "Plant" level.
* Olga fight involves a handgun dual between several bits of cover for both the boss and the player as well as environmental elements the boss uses against the player, such as a bright spotlight and tarp being held down by bricks. The boss can also throw grenades behind cover she things the player is hiding behind.
* Soldier fight is very similar in substance to the Olga fight but with less environmental variables, multiple enemies, and in a very tight, narrow corridor.
* AP Sensor detects nearby lifeforms and vibrates on enemy approach.
* Interactable computer modules called "nodes" are on every room of the big shell, and show up as a stationary blue dot on the radar. Once activated, you will recieve a topographic map of the room the node is in on your radar. Nodes can also be used to change in-game options.
* Hidden C4 Explosives must be frozen with coolant. The location of bombs can be determined by its odor cloud showing up on radar when holding the bomb sensor. Coolant can also be used for chasing away bugs, waking up sleeping soldiers, and removing fire to gain access to micro-areas.
* Fatman fight involves an arena similar to the one in vulkan raven, although more open. Fatman is very mobile due to his roller blades, and will place C4 around the map that must all be frozen within the time limit. Fatman can hide bombs in different areas such as on shelves, barrels, and even on top of or below containers. Due to his bomb suit being highly shielded, damage when shooting him is highly minimal, but rapid fire will knock him off balance and reveal his head.
* In order to access the Shell 1 core basement, the player must return to the warehouse with the Lvl 2 card and find the room with an AKS-74u (and optionally the M4) in order to blend in with the soldiers there so that the elevator camera won't be alerted.

----

== AREAS ==
=== Aft deck ===
* Deck-A, B, C etc.
    * Deck-A, crew's quarters features to long narrow corridors on either side, and a large locker room in the middle
    * Deck-D, crew's quarters features a dining area with a bar and tables to crawl under, a food pantry with shelves to crawl under and a cardboard box, and an IR laser sensor to crawl under with a nearby fire extinguisher to shoot to make the lasers visible

=== Crew's Quarters ===

=== Crew's Lounge ===

=== Navigation Deck ===

=== Engine Room ===
* Engine room port-side has 3 IR sensors and their respective controllers hooked up to semtex explosives. The only way to get past is by deactivating the semtex controllers by shooting them. One is in plain sight, another is visible by standing on top of an object. The last one is visible once the first two are taken out so that you can get close enough to shoot it

=== Hold no. 1 / 2 etc. ===
    * Holds feature many soldiers facing a projection of the commandant giving a speech. Progresssion rooms are located at the front of each hold. The player must sneak around the soldiers' field of vision by staying around the edges of the holds and yielding to variables along the way such as avoiding light rays from the projector, soldiers on the ends that move, soldiers

=== Shell Cores 1, 2 ===

=== Strut-A, B, C etc. ===
* Each strut is connected by another strut by means of a connecting bridge. Some bridges have a higher and lower entrance to each strut, giving the player the option to choose which level of the next room they wish to infultrate. Connecting bridges are typically guarded by guards and flying camera drones. The drones can move side to side and raise and lower the level they are on- they can also not hear gunshots. The bridges have fully shrouded railings for the player to crawl along, and open guard railings that are see-through, but can be hanged along to get past guards, or get past other obstacles.

* Strut A = Pump facility
* Strut B = Transformer room
* Strut C = Dining hall
* Strut D = Sediment Pool
* Strut E = Material distribution facility
* Strut F = Warehouse
* Strut G = Oil processing facility
* Strut H = Warehouse
* Strut I = Assembly facility
* Strut J = Power plant
* Strut K = Biochem lab

=== Deep Sea Dock ===
* Deap sea dock features lockers and ventilation shafts to explore and hide in, and guards patrolling a room with boxes, pallets and barrels stacked in another part divided by a connector

=== Pump Room ===
* Pump room features two sets of stairs on either side followed by a pair of lockers next to either staircase. Between the two staircases there is a small cubicle-like control center. In the room south of that is a large square room with a large maze-like pipe complex in the middle that the player must crawl and climb under, over, and along to reach the bomb and optionally the cardboard box

=== Warehouse ===

=== Parcel Room ===
* Parcel room features a large room with an active conveyer belt moving boxes in a loop along the whole room. Cameras are mounted on columns in the middle of the room, and can be snuck past by crawling under the belt machine without being caught by the guards, or by walking along the conveyer belt at the same speed as the boxes that it carries by. {moving cover} There are also shelves in the far north end of the room to hide under. The conveyer belt machine has small platforms for loading boxes onto, that the player can climb on and take out one of several cardboard boxes to fast-travel to their respective areas. {fast-travel}

=== Shell 1 Core - Air Purification Room ===
* Shell 1 core

Shell 1 Core B1
* Shell 1

