== GENERAL/MISC ==
* Optional lore expositions and information are gathered with the scan visor throughout the entire game. A logbook keeps track of important data you've collected and can be read anytime.
* Health and ammo drop from crates and enemies (as needed by the player's current health/ammo) throughout the game.
* Boss health bars appear upon scanning them.
* After shooting very quickly for an extended time, Samus's arm-cannon will [[glossary#Graphical FX|emit heat-waves]].

* Basic [[glossary#Target Practice|target practice]] for [[glossary#Shoot Targets to Proceed|gate progression]] early game.
* [[glossary#Aesthetic Presentation|Atmospheric visual flare]] such as visor condensation and rain droplets early game.
* Scan certain panels to [[glossary#Activate to Proceed|unlock doors/elevators and activate objects.]]
* Basic crippled enemies early game. [[glossary#Target Practice|(Target Practice)]], [[glossary#Taste Testing|(Taste Testing)]]
* Introducing abilities for progression/combat purposes early game ([[glossary#Shoot Targets to Proceed|shoot rubble w/ charge]], [[glossary#Target Practice|shoot drone w/ missile]]).
* Ambient creatures [[glossary#Visual Hinting|reveal map room]].
* [[glossary#Environmental Hazards|Envoronmental Hazards]] such as electricity/fire etc. encourage the player to [[glossary#Yield to Proceed|yield]] and take notice of the danger meter.
* Turret defense disabling through use of scanning panels (optional). [[glossary#Visual Hinting|(Visual Hinting)]], [[|(Mechanical Hinting)]], [[|(out of box option)]]
* [[|Timed escape sequence]] using collection of (some) basic tasks learned through the tutorial opening.
* Abilities you've become familiar with lost, and must be reacquired
* Areas/rooms are designed only vaguely realistically, with realistic naming conventions
* Some optional areas and micro-areas visible/blocked off serve as [[glossary#Teasers|teasers]] for later abilities as soon as you reach Tallon IV
* Mysterious [[glossary#Significant Landmarking|artifact temple looks highly significant]], although cannot immediately be made sense of or what to do there, we can only access it fairly early in the game.
* Elevators serve as [[glossary#Fast Travel|access between macro-areas]]
* Powerups [[glossary#Audible Hinting|emit subtle sound when nearby]]
* Chozo tree doesn't immediately look special, but [[glossary#Visual Hinting|reflects blasts]] just like blast shields.
* Certain walls [[glossary#Expositional Hinting|defined with certain named materials]], implying they can be broken with a respective ability.
* Key item rooms [[glossary#One-way Valves|lock the player from within]] to escape using the respective item.
* Missile launcher useful in combat, allows for breaking certain walls/barriers, and is particularly useful (though optional) in the NEXT proceding boss fight as the [[glossary#Area of Effect|blast radius]] can kill multiple enemies.
* [[glossary#Cluster Enemies|Cluster enemies]] in some transition areas in Chozo Ruins.
* Morph ball allows access through crevices previously unable to traverse.
* During backtracking for items, find optional elevator to magmoor caverns north blocked by intense heat (one in Ruins, another in Overworld).
* Heavy use of [[glossary#Teasers|visible, but unusable]] spider-ball tracks in early Chozo Ruins.
* [[glossary#Search and Activate to Proceed|Scan hidden runics]] to unlock large door.
* Morph ball bombs allow certain materials to be broken, certain switches to be activated, and further morph ball mobility options
* Use of 2D-like morph ball puzzles in which you bomb certain blocks to proceed and grab the powerup
* [[glossary#Timed Consecutive Action Sequence|Timed morph ball bomb slot sequences]] to access optional energy tank.
* [[glossary#Optional Technique Mastery|Master morph ball bomb timing]] to acquire optional missile expansion.
* [[glossary#Two-sector Alternation Model|Two-sector alternation model]] featuring a [[glossary#Double Loop|double loop]] in early Chozo Ruins
* Varia suit allows access to high-temperature areas
* [[glossary#Environmental Transformation|Environmental transformation]] gives access to some new micro-areas within Chozo Ruins post-Flahgraa (toxic water >> clean water)
* [[glossary#Inverse Forking|Two different roads]] within Magmoor caverns to choose from after Flahgraa to access Phendrana Drifts
* Underground morph ball maze sections with predatory enemies in Magmoor Caverns
* Boost ball allows access to higher levels of half-pipes, and [[glossary#Streamline Ability|speeding through areas]]
* Space Jump Boots allows double jumping, making [[glossary#Streamline Ability|traversing old areas easier]] and new ones possible
* [[glossary#Macro Alternation Model|Alternation between macro-areas]] after Flahgraa (Phendrana > Tallon IV > Phendrana)
* Sometimes [[glossary#Shoot and Climb to Proceed|stalactites must be shot]] to access higher spots.
* Sheegoth requires you to shoot the mouth with specific weapon while not using other weapons, as it charges the boss's attacks, making it stronger
* Higher level enemies [[glossary#Backtrack Filler|fill in previous areas]] once certain checkpoints are reached
* Thermal visor allows for nightvision, locating certain enemies' weak points, and finding power conduits to activate with wave beam to unlock doors
* Visor/HUD interference is a cool [[glossary#Aesthetic Presentation|visual effect]]
* [[glossary#Expositional Lore|Expositional lore]] collection from computers in space pirate base
* Phendrana space pirate base section was cool. [[glossary#Linear Fetch and Escape|(Linear fetch and escape)]]
* Spider ball allows for latching on and riding certain magnetic rails, as well as [[glossary#Streamline Ability|easier access]] to some areas.
* Return to Chozo ruins to explore with spider-ball and other new toys post-Thardus
* Certain beam weapons allows for [[glossary#Environmental Transformation|environmental transformation]] giving access to new micro-areas. (hall of the elders)
* [[glossary#One-shot Sequence Break|One-shot sequence break]] (geothermal core)
* Phendrada depths gravity suit search section features a [[glossary#Linear Fetch-and-escape Sequence|linear fetch-and-escape sequence]] with a series of [[glossary#One-way Valves|one-way valves]]
* [[glossary#Search and Activate to Proceed|Find and activate power conduits]] (pirate base, crashed frigate)
* [[glossary#Solve to Proceed|Column twist puzzle]] in Phazon Mines
* [[glossary#Non-linear Item Quest|2/3rds non-linear item quest]] to proceed into Phazon Mines depths (X-ray visor/grapple beam free post-power bomb, plasma beam free post-grapple beam)
* X-ray visor allows you to see completely invisible objects (such as walls and platforms), which are sometimes [[glossary#Visual Hinting|hinted toward by rain droplets]]
* Grapple beam allows for swinging to areas unable to jump to or otherwise reach, and also [[glossary#Streamline Ability|quicker area traversal]]
* Plasma beam allows for access through red doors, and melting ice. Although it has a limited range, it makes quick work of enemies with its fast and powerful damage that also [[glossary#Tick Damage|sets enemies on fire]] and disintegrates many regular enemies with one charge shot
* New abilities can enable [[glossary#Unlockable Shortcuts|access through shortcuts]] for quicker, more streamlined traversal between areas and macro-areas
* Most upgrades are generally [[glossary#Multi-purpose Abilities|multi-purpose tools]] that serve purposes in some combination of progression, combat and/or streamlining
* [[glossary#Grand Fetch Quest|Grand fetch quest]] assisted by [[glossary#Expositional Hinting|hints on where to find the Chozo artifacts]]
* Level design, enemy design, and hidden powerups all take future upgrades into account for mid and late game exploration with consideration to the [[glossary#Powerup Flow|"powerup flow"]] to some degree

----

== AREAS ==

=== PIRATE FRIGATE ===
* The pirate frigate serves as a temporary tutorial area to get the player accustomed to the game's controls and mechanics. This area is also "reused" later in a completely different way. The game provides [[expositional hints]] by telling them how to activate and use certain mechanics and weapons such as scan visor, morph ball, missiles, charge beam etc. and features a basic boss fight and [[escape sequence]] at the end before revoking several of the player's abilities that they had learned to use.

==== Exterior Docking Hangar ====
* The game begins with an open platform with the player facing two columns with [[glossary#Shoot Targets to Proceed|buttons that must be shot]] to proceed. The perimeter of the platform is blocked off with what are essentially [[glossary#Invisible Walls|invisible walls]]  so that the player can move freely in the tutorial area without falling. These barriers glow when touched or shot to provide more [[glossary#Immersive Feedback|immersive feedback]] than if they were to merely exist without being seen. Using the scan visor to [[glossary#Search and Activate to Proceed|find and activate]] certain [[glossary#Cloaking|hidden targets]] allows the player to aim and shoot [[glossary#Target Practice|higher targets]] to deactivate the force field to proceed. From here, standard doors can be opened by shooting them.

==== Air Lock ====
* Upon entering, mist creates [[glossary#Graphical FX|visor condensation]] for added effect, and well as floating parasites in zero-gravity that explode when shot- [[glossary#Graphical FX|spraying blood]] on the player's visor.

==== Emergency Evacuation Area ====
* This area presents low level enemies that are non-threatening to [[glossary#Target Practice|practice shooting]].

==== Deck Alpha Umbilical Hall ====
* A rubble blockage requires a [[glossary#Shoot Targets to Proceed|charge beam shot]] to blow it open and proceed.

==== Map Facility ====
* A cutscene plays showing parasites [[glossary#Visual Hinting|scampering into a hole]] and into the map room, implying that the morph ball can (optionally) be used to acquire a map of the area.

==== Connection Elevator to Deck Beta ====
* Here, elevators are shown how they work. First, [[glossary#Search and Activate to Proceed|find the node]] to scan its respective elevator, and [[glossary#Activate to Proceed|step into the hologram]] to activate the elevator.

==== Deck Beta Conduit Hall ====
* A blockage fills the room with a [[glossary#Visual Hinting|small hole]] to fit a morph ball inside, but an electrical hazard also guards the hole. [[Yield to Proceed|Timing is needed]] to get past it safely.

==== Biotech Research Area 1 ====
* [[glossary#Taste Testing|Crippled enemies]] patrol the room, but also a large ventilation shaft cover [[glossary#Foreshadowing|appears to be unstable]], but doesn't do anything at the moment.
* Upon returning to this area during the escape sequence, a massive explosion allows for jumping atop broken rubble to climb back up to what was a covered ventilation shaft, but is now accessible.

==== Biohazard Containment ====
* Security defense turrets guard the halls of this area and are hostile. The player is instructed to optionally use missiles, but [[glossary#Out-of-box Option|scanning a hidden nearby node]] will deactivate the nearby turret, rendering it harmless. Nearby tanks hold some basic [[glossary#Foreshadowing|enemies and creatures]] of Tallon IV to be examined, as well as a cell with a violent, shaking door with some creature inside, merely to distract and interest of the player.

==== Reactor Core Entrance ====
* Following a cargo lift with an encounter with a fully capable enemy, and a cargo door with morph ball needed to activate and open, the reactor core entrance features a [[|save room]] before a fight with [[#Parasite Queen|the boss]]. Following the defeat over the boss begins the escape sequence.

==== Ventilation Shaft ====
* Following the aforementioned ventilation opening allows full access to the vent shaft. Massive [[glossary#Cluster Enemies|clusters of parasites]] scurry in panic, and are mildly harmful such large numbers. [[glossary#Graphical FX|Heat vapor]] can also condensate on the visor. A room with a massive sliding piston requires the player to move along with the piston and enter the side door before the piston strokes again.

==== Biotech Research Area 2 ====
* Meta Ridley makes his appearance in a cutscene, and the player must [[#glossaryTaste Testing|use the grapple beam]] to fly over the pool to proceed.

==== Connection Elevator to Deck Alpha ====
* Upon scanning a panel to deactivate a defense turret, and avoiding another [[glossary#Yield to Proceed|electrical hazard]], a cutscene plays after activating the elevator that removes most of your suit augmentations and abilities. Upon exiting back through the air lock and into the docking hangar completes this area.


=== TALLON IV ===
* Tallon IV is the first "true" macro-area of the game after the tutorial sequence, and serves somewhat as a weak-hubworld, as it is the area of origin, and offers paths to every other macro-area in the main game, but isn't structured too strongly or differently from other macro-areas that are less hub-like.

==== Landing Site ====
* The game now starts off with having landed on Tallon IV, and immediately the player is presented with several doors to go through. The path to the elevator to Chozo Ruins being the intended way to progression.
* The pond nearby the ship can be jumped into and is full of fish, and the raindrops from above make [[glossary#Graphical FX|droplets on your visor]] when you look up at them.

==== Tallon Canyon ====


=== CHOZO RUINS ===

==== Main Plaza ====



==== Ruined Courtyard ====
* Ruined Courtyard features a [[glossary#Timed Consecutive Action Sequence|timed consecutive action sequence]] with morph-ball bomb slots, and snowy platforms mixed with an [[glossary#Environmental Transformation|environmental transformation]] section where the water rises. In-between the start of the timed action sequence and the goal at the top of the level, a morph-ball tunnel containing an energy tank is [[glossary#Visual Hinting|hinted at]] with a glowing rim. Once grabbed, the timed action and transformation sequences must be done over again to reach the top and proceed.

==== Tower of Light ====
* Tower of light is a very tall, cylindrical room featuring sets of platforms reaching to the top. On four sections along the circumference of the cylindrical room there are [[stress points]] indicating that they can be damaged. The stress points can be destroyed with 3 missiles each for a total of 12 missiles minimum for each round. Upon dispatching the stress points, the room [[glossary#Environmental Transformation|truncates itself from the middle]], thereby lowering the upper part of the room, where the player repeats the process twice more, with increased challenge coming from moving [[missile reflecting enemies]] along the stress points and [[sun rays obscuring your vision]]. [[glossary#Quantitative Gatekeeping|36 missiles are required]] to complete the room in one go. [[glossary#Replenishment Mob|Replenishment mobs]] are used to assist with keeping enough missiles.

=== PHENDRANA DRIFTS ===

==== Observatory Access ====
* Upon entering from a vertical door, the player is greeted with stacked crates with turrets behind them. If activated by proximity, the turrets will [[blast open the crates]] and shoot the player.

==== Hall of the Elders ====
* A pseudo-miniboss fight always begins in this room, but it's

----

== BOSSES ==

=== Parasite Queen ===

=== Hive Mecha ===
* Hive-mecha fight requires killing increasingly present mobile enemies and tracking them with [[radar]] and [[glossary#Audible Hinting|audio queues]] to expose the weak-point of stationary boss. Rinse and repeat three times to win.

=== Plated Beetle ===
* Plated beetle fight begins with the player fighting [[glossary#Minions|many regular beetles]] at once in the arena until enough are killed to summon the plated beetle. It encourages player to use the dodge ability [[glossary#Visual Hinting|at the correct time]] to [[glossary#Circle-strafing|circle around the enemy]] to shoot its [[glossary#Backside Weakspot|exposed backside]]

=== Incinerator Drone ===
* Incinerator drone fight requires you to jump and duck past the boss's [[glossary#Circle-strafing|circular attack pattern]] and to shoot the [[glossary#Peakaboo Weakspot|temporarily exposed weak point]] while dealing with [[glossary#Minions|increasingly present weaker enemies]]

=== Flahgraa ===
* Flahgraa fight requires you to shoot to stun the boss and deactivate nodes to incapacitate the boss in order to damage it

=== Thardus ===
* Thardus requires you to [[glossary#Dynamic Weakspot|locate its weak-point]] with thermal visor, attack it, then switch back to normal visor and target the same point to destroy that point. Rinse and repeat. [[glossary#Aesthetic Presentation|(Some weather effects too)]]

----

== EXPLOITS ==
=== Early Space Jump Boots ===
* Space jump boots are able to be acquired much earlier than intended, and in multiple different ways depending on the version of the game being played.

=== Early Plasma Beam ===

----

== THOUGHTS ==
* I think that given the task Retro Studios was given with, they hit the nail on the head making Metroid's debut in 3D, and filling in Super Metroid's shoes. Although not perfect, Prime serves as a great first-person action/adventure game - and perhaps the only of its kind - with such a heavy focus on the MV formula. The atmosphere just great.

* I think there was lots of thought put into the level design from the micro to the macro level. The levels and areas flow together nicely all things considered, and the emphasis on exploration and encouraging the player to check back on the things they were blue-balled on before was pretty good. Although it does a good job at honoring Super Metroids design philosophy and atmosphere, the game feel leaves some to be desired- as it is after all a single-stick first-person shooter, and silky, satisfying movement mechanics would have been much harder to implement. The targeting system does its best to keep things smooth, but looking around can feel stiff and slow at times. (I wish there was a sensitivity option somewhere). Platforming while not bad, isn't nearly as smooth and satisfying as in Super Metroid.

* Here's some nitpicks and other thoughts. Although the flow between levels is generally good, I would've maybe liked it if there were more breakable or uncoverable shortcuts to make traveling even more streamlined across areas than they already were. In this way I feel like the grapple beam is underutilized, as it is a prime candidate for this job, but it is also just fun to use. I think it would've been viable to use something other than strictly the "grapple points" as use for the grapple beam, such as maybe some more natural or mechanical elements that fit the environment you're in. I think the spiderball could've been used more often too, especially in some of those slower morphball-only sections.

* Another thing I notice is that most of the extra/optional powerups aren't particularly exciting/efficient - as in they mainly consist of 5-stock missile expansions to add to your massive stockpile of missiles (which is nice, but at some point it becomes like a diminishing returns effect) and power bomb expansions which really don't serve much of a purpose besides breaking certain walls and saying "fuck it" to enemies that you just want to deal with quickly and get over with, and considering how easy it is for power bomb refills to drop from enemies anyway, these expansions really don't feel like they serve much of a meaningful purpose at all. There's also the elemental super missiles for each respective beam weapon, but the vanilla super missile is simply the most efficient in terms of both effectiveness and ammo efficiency in the vast majority of cases, so the other ones are really just "meh" even if they're kinda cool.

* I also question the game's ability to point the player in the right direction at a couple points in the game. In this way, I think the developers relied too much on the hint system to mask flaws in the level design. Two examples stick out to me and those are the half-pipe in Tallon Overworld and sunken frigate entrance after grabbing the ice beam. I understand why the developers included the hint system- to guide players who inevitably get lost to their next progression point without giving _too_ much information away on how to get there (most of the time). I just think that most of the items and progression points did this well enough on their own without the need for the hint system, while a select few did not. The half-pipe example requires the player to go _all_ the way back to Tallon Overworld after acquiring the boost ball to locate a specific and easy to miss half-pipe that is required to get the space jump boots. It's not the backtracking itself that particularly bothers me, it's just that the answer the boost ball is too obtuse on its own (without the hint) to justify its design choice, I think. The most egregious example of this comes mid-game after the ice beam is acquired. Once the spider ball is acquired, you are greeted with an ice door upon entering the next elevator room. This ice door was to serve as the main hint on where to go after acquiring the ice beam shortly after. Or perhaps even the ice door in the research core. The problem is that these doors are easy to ignore and forget, and on top of that- once acquiring the ice beam- you are given two more paths to explore immediately. One leads to Magmoor Caverns for optional stuff, and the other leads to the entrance to the sunken frigate which is also blocked by an ice door. If the player enters the frigate before going back to Phendrana Drifts to grab the gravity suit, then they will have to though a slog of underwater scavenger hunting and platforming only to be told to go straight back all the way up from where they came. This blatant flaw easily could've been fixed in a couple ways just off the top of my head. One way is to move the door that drops you into the frigate crash site from Chozo Ruins _behind_ the body of water, that way the player is still gatekept by that instead of given premature access to the frigate. Another way to solve this is to simply put a door early on in the frigate that's inaccessible to anyone without the gravity suit, so that the player doesn't get premature access to the reactor core and cargo freight just to trek back in the most crude way possible- being explicitly told to.

* Another thing that slightly bothered me is the repetitive use of particular enemies in sometimes in early/mid game (Flying Pirates and Shriekbats in particular get overused) and in some instances of the game the topography feels too similar (cylindrical access tunnels get used alot early/mid-game). One blemish with the level design in this game which I particularly disliked (disregarding the no-hint stuff), was retrieving the artifact of newborn. I feel like the fix would be very simply to put it closer to the entrance/exit point of the area that its in (being the Phazon Mines depths) instead of being right in the awkward middle area that its in, and given that there isn't a backtrack-phase in that area like the other artifacts because its the very end of the game, there's no real way to go back and get it that doesn't feel like a real slog.

